Session of the hearings of the, um,
inquiry into Fire and Emergency New Zealand's fleet management and
related issues. And we have our first submitter
online, Adriana de Souza. If you can hear me,
Adriana, can you put your camera on and
make sure you're unmuted, and we will get going once
you have appeared. There you are.
Cool.
Adriana, you have five minutes with us now, and lovely
to see you, and over to you.
Cool. So I made my submission because, um, I am a concerned member of the
public, um, and I want to express my serious concerns about the level of
resourcing available to FENZ.
In particular, in relation to the reliability,
availability, and the management of its appliance fleet.
Not only as a concerned member of the public, I have had,
um, first-hand experience of a major fire incident in my own
neighborhood back in 2024 with the
Parnell Lodge fire.
I lived at one of the neighboring properties and I saw the
first-hand the
sort of the
work and effort that the FENZ team puts into the
community in terms of protecting everybody and keeping everybody safe, um,
and witnessed their level of service and dedication to the community
after the effect as well.
I think we should be able to, in this country, be confident that when emergencies
occur, that FENZ is resourced correctly to help us.
Right.
Have you got anything else that you wanted to add before I open up for questions,
Adriana?
No, that's all.
Okay. So I'll just open up and see if there's any questions from the committee.
Sure.
Tim?
One question here from Tim Costley.
Kia ora, Adriana, and it was really good reading your submission and hearing
about your experience, not just with, uh, it was the Parnell fire,
I think, from memory.
Yes.
So I think you wrote about the follow-up and the aftermath and
how engaged the FENZ staff were on the ground
of the firefighters that were out there, and I think that's really encouraging to
hear.
When we think about the vehicles and the fleet, what is the
either the biggest concern or the biggest thing that you think
we should be thinking about or FENZ should be thinking about in terms
of managing those appliances?
Maintenance and sort of availability of vehicles. There should be enough.
We shouldn't have to have fire engines or, um, departments having to
close for certain hours
during the day. I know that with the FENZ one, they all came from,
I think, multiple, um, departments.
Sorry, the Parnell one. They all came from multiple, um, houses over,
um, because the local Parnell one was closed at the time, which
shouldn't have been
a worry.
Okay. And, uh,
and in terms of y- one of your recommendations was around
long-term funding.
If that meant, uh, you just let me devil's advocate this for a minute, if
that's okay.
Yeah.
If that, o- obviously, FENZ get effectively all of their funding
through people like you and me paying our insurance.
Would you be okay with paying a little bit more on your levy to
fund
more trucks or whatever, if, if that was the only way to fund it?
Would you be... What do you think the reaction would be?
Personally, having first-hand experiences, I would.
There's not an amount of money I wouldn't pay-
Yeah
... and it would be justified to me.
I think you meet these people on some of the worst days of your life,
and then you think, "Great,
I am more than willing to pay 5% more on my insurance levy."
That's helpful.
Every time they shake a bucket with me now, I, we donate.
Thank you.
Adriana, that appears to be all the questions.
Thank you very much and thank you for sharing your experience, even the trauma that
you've been through. Um, very helpful for us to hear that.
So thank you very much for making that submission.
Perfect. Thanks, guys. Bye.
Thank you.
Right, that brings us on to New Zealand Firefighters Professional Union
Wellington Locals. We've got...
Thank you. Thank you for your time with us here today.
Thanks very much.
And, um, are you Alan?
Yes.
Alan. Thank you, Alan, for making time to come and meet with
us. We have 10 minutes with you, and I'm
sure you know the drill.
Yep.
That's inclusive of questions if you want us to have that
opportunity.
Okay. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Alan Collett. I'm a career Senior Station Off- Officer
within FENZ. I am not an elected NZPFU
official, but I have assisted in drafting the submission from the Wellington branch
of the NZPFU. I'm based in Wellington and have worked throughout
the wider Wellington region, and more recently, I spent a short period of
time in an operational response role in the Nelson
area.I have 20 years in operational roles within FENZ
and previously in New Zealand Fire Service.
This also includes involvement in a number of projects of national
significance.
Prior to being a firefighter, I spent just over a decade in the New Zealand Army,
during which time I deployed operationally, and I also have extensive
experience working in high-risk environments, spending seven years working
offshore for various NGOs and commercial entities in
the landmine and explosive ordnance disposal industry.
I would like to speak to three key points today: current and future
needs,
the response network that has been referred to within previous meetings,
and the alternative tactical selection by officers as referred to in
previous meetings.
Current and future needs. I would like to speak to future needs.
I believe FENZ has a lack of foresight as to what its
changing response landscape looks like, in particular in
relation to urban aerial appliances, something that has been a
topic of this inquiry.
As you are aware, five aerials have been purchased to fill an immediate
need.
However, although convened, a working group is yet to meet to
discuss what the future aerial strategy may look like
to take us into the lifespan of any new purchases.
This group finally comes together next month after a five-year wait.
Yes, we have purchased five medium to heavy aerials, and the
push to a 45-meter reach was insightful for both Auckland and
Hamilton. But how can we truly understand what capability we
require from these appliances when a robust analysis of
international trends, the direction of construction
design, and wider influences have not yet been
analyzed?
Operational procedures in relation to response to fire within
multi-story buildings have not been reviewed with any significance for
over 10 years.
This despite multiple international incidents to learn from,
behavioral changes of the public, and political influence
into the changes in the construction sector.
Appliances in the type four category are already nearing end of life.
We have purchased five new aerial appliances at a cost of $12.5
million and we have not fully yet analyzed what our
capability needs really are in relation to a
high-rise response strategy.
Key pieces of work need to be completed so they inform the direction of
the organization's operational response.
Projects are often underway and are being conducted with
what appears to be no cohesive approach, and it is surely
fiscally inefficient in the long term.
The response network.
You have been told that FENZ operates a structured network in response
to a reported peak of 246 mechanical
breakdowns in the financial year of '24 and '25.
However, what you may not be aware of are the vulnerabilities at the
varying layers of that network.
In the response environment, we operate in a world of incomplete information,
and from the time of dispatch, the wrong or conflicting information
from a 111 caller may be the start of it.
Communication centers that are under strain then dispatch appliances as
required.
Maybe then staffing shortages or the inability of volunteers to
turn out play a part
and increased drive times due to station closures and increased traffic
flows delay arrival. These are some of the
vulnerabilities within the network, and if we apply James
Reason's Swiss cheese risk modeling, we can see how these
vulnerabilities start to align and systematic failure is
not far off.
For senior leaders to minimize the impact of these mechanical breakdowns
is an acceptance of them and is the first sign of the drift to
failure.
It is the normalization of deviance, which in turn starts to undermine the other
layers of the network.
Rasmussen's barrier model tells us we are skirting the boundaries of
acceptable performance, and within the barrier model, it is
identified even a minor system
disturbance or a sudden loss of operational
buffer can cause a sudden jump over the edge into systematic
failure.
Tactical selection by officers.
I've heard it being said that FENZ officers and firefighters are trained to
select alternative tactics when the appropriate
resourcing is not made available due to mechanical breakdowns.
Yes, we seek an alternative tactic, but
often it is due to the fact we are forced into selecting
inferior tactics that do not necessarily lead to the best
incident outcomes.
When an incident occurs, a tactical window of opportunity
opens.
The longer it takes for arrival, that window starts to close.
Tactical options start to become limited or are taken off the table.
If the right resourcing is not available in the right timeframe, such as
an aerial appliance with the right capability, these optimal
tactics are no longer available to us for selection and the window
continues to close.
We operate with incomplete information and we operate within
constraints of time. This is the essence of studies by
Gary Klein into the decision making methodologies of first
responders.
Senior leadership seem to have lost sight of this and as the
tactical window closes, we have limited opportunities to
implement aggressive life-saving tactics, as
we have recently witnessed in house fires in Hamilton and Christchurch.
The economic impact on society increases with the increased
property loss.Recently, FENZ added an additional
measure to the annual reporting.
Structure fires contained within a room of origin where
suppression was required. The target has been set at
80% of the time, and they are barely achieving
61.6%.
And if we speak to the training of officers and firefighters, both career
and volunteer,
I am confident that we will find no distinct
detail on formal learning outcomes where officers and
firefighters are taught tactical selection and deployment.
It is learnt through osmosis and one's personal experience.
A recent internal review of FENZ's wider training curriculum has
found systematic inconsistencies, misaligned content,
inconsistent assessment practices, and training facilities and
learning resources that are outdated and require urgent
improvement and investment.
More vulnerabilities within the network.
Thank you for your time, and I'm happy to attempt to answer any questions you may
have.
Thank you. Thanks, Allen, for that. We've got time for a couple of questions.
I've got one here.
Can I just, like the reference to the James Reason model, familiar with
that. In terms of the tactics,
so we were told in committee back in January that
if an aerial appliance breaks down, this was in response
to questions about Christine,
then they can change tactics and adapt and overcome.
Is there a
meaningful difference in outcome if you
have to change tactics? Is it consequential is what I'm asking.
Yes. I'll use Lofhouse Lodge as an example.
Yes.
Although I did not attend the fire, I know it fairly well.
The Type 5 appliance was off the run at Newtown.
It was replaced with a Type 4,
temporarily, which has much more limited capability-
Yes
... from an upper storey rescue.
When it responded to Lofhouse Lodge, it positioned itself on the
southern side of the building,
and then it was found it was not going to be effective there for rescues.
The officer in charge had to change his tactics, and another Type
5 was requested from Thornleigh. We now know from
the subsequent inquiries that people were jumping out of those windows on
the southern side of the building onto the roof next door.
So we could not effect rescues on that side of the building that night.
That's because it didn't have, it was such a 16 story-
It either didn't have the reach or the Type 5s have a
second knuckle called a fly boom, which gives them much more
maneuverability.
But they also told us that these days, a lot of buildings have internal
systems, that it's not an external...
My understanding was that it wasn't so much about the external battle
to fight the fire.
Yeah.
How vital are your aerial fleets?
So, the building systems play a big part-
Yes
... in both our tactics and we can use them to our advantage,
such as pressurizing stairwells and things like that.
If we look at Greenfell, we had a failure in the building systems.
If we look at Lofhouse Lodge, it was an old stock building that didn't
have the necessary upgrades, and there are still a lot of buildings like that
within the New Zealand construction sector.
Okay.
Lamona.
Thank you, and thank you for your submission today.
I want to ask a question around training, because you have mentioned
training in terms of the systematic problems, et cetera-
Yeah
... and the investment that's into it.
Can you comment more about how vital it is to keep the
upgrade, the sustainability of both volunteer and
career?
Oh, it's essential.
You can't minimize the importance of it.
And
we are still working on a training system that was
designed
in 2005, 2007 from the urban point of view.
With our rural colleagues, they're still on a separate training system.
So part of the review was to look at what was systematically wrong, but also bring
us together. What are we now? 2026, finally as
one entity so that we're all on the same training system,
and completing similar courses.
Okay. Just a quick, so how many training schools
are being provided? Is it four? Is it one throughout the year?
Or sort of does it change?
It varies on your stage of your career.
But if I'm a senior firefighter in the urban space and I
choose not to become an officer, that is the end of my formalized
training.
Everything else is done through osmosis on station as
we see fit.
Okay.
Okay. Because we had somebody that has pulled out, I've got a couple
of minutes, but I've only got a couple of minutes, but I've got two more questions,
if that's okay with you, Allen.
Yeah.
So we go to Mike and then Andy.
Thank you. And my question should be quick.
Thanks for the excellent submission.
Hmm.
And I guess my question is, like,
the issues with the fleet, is this like a symptom of a wider problem
within FENZ, or is this the
biggest issue we FENZ has faced?
I think it's a symptom of a wider problem.
Okay.
In a nutshell.
Yeah.
Great. Thank you. Andy.
Just a quick one, and thanks for everything you do now, both now and in the past.
Just in terms of the engines, the interface between the appliances and the
buildings you've got. So,
with the other, the highest you go is what, 45 odd meters, is that right?
Of a building-
And with the newer purchase it'll be 45 meters.
The current Type 5s are 32.5.
Yeah. So at anything above that, you're reliant on the building systems.
Yes.
For most of our taller buildings now, are we in a place where the building
system actually will do-
So-
... a lot of the work that you need to be done other than obviously you have to
manually-
I'm aware of a draft paper in our-
How do they work?
I'm aware of a draft paper in our risk reduction space-
Yeah
... working with the, um-
A short one
... industry around what we look like from 20 stories and
above.
Yep.
Now-After Green fell, London pushed to a
64-meter aerial. They had 32.5-
Yeah
... the same as us.
Yeah.
And they've gone to a 64-meter aerial.
Okay.
I'm not saying we go there, but we haven't really analyzed what those taller
buildings, or super high-rises as some people call them-
Yeah
... what that looks like for us operationally. We haven't done the analysis.
So that's work that really needs to be done.
Yes, I would say so.
Okay. Thank you.
She promises me it's going to be short.
Yeah.
Melissa.
Uh, I'm just referring to five new aerial appliances at a cost of 2.5
million. Has it been delivered?
Uh, they are in country, I believe, and they are currently
being fitted out as much as-
So it's been in country for a few years?
Uh, I think, I can't comment with any
detail on that, but I think they've been in country for about a year at least.
Alan, thank you very much for that.
Thank you.
That's been really super helpful.
Brilliant.
Very good for the inquiry. Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Thanks for coming in person as well.
Thank you for your service.
Okay. Murray.
Yes.
Murray Duffield.
Welcome, Murray.
You know the thing, we have five minutes with you.
Thank you for the invitation to meet with this committee.
On that understanding,
I understand
that my submission has been read by the members of the committee.
Sure.
But I'd like to add the following supplementary comments to the
submission that I put in. It appears that FENS has a
strong focus on the age of fire appliances more than the question around whether
they're fit for purpose.
From a 2013 FENS fleet data sheet of
805 urban appliances,
500 had traveled fewer than 50,000 kilometers, which is
not a large kilometer
for those appliances, each appliance.
Although there are some kilometer gaps in this data set,
it's not a profile of a fleet suffering from
excess wear, high operational demand, or systematic
end-of-life failure.
What is also concerning is the negative commentary that has been aired by FENS
around the age
of the rural fleet that was transferred to FENS in
2017.
From a survey of rural fire authorities in 2014,
392 rural fire appliances, tankers,
smoke chasers, recorded at the 30th of June
2013, one-third were more than 25 years old.
Most of this rural fleet involves vehicles with low mileage, even
those over 25 year old.
Not all of the 392 rural vehicles were transferred to FENS
in 2017. Forest Owners retained their fleet,
and they've recently completed a forest fire capability study
for forest owners.
From that study, forest owners had 54 forest fire
4x4 tankers,
eight large water tankers, 41 smoke chasers, which are
utilities with small tanks and hose reels on the back,
over 300 portable forest fire pumps,
80,500 meters of forest firefighting hose,
95 heavy bulldozers in forest, and a further
258 20 or 50 ton diggers.
They have 778 trained forest firefighters
and 281 fire managers and crew leaders.
This resource
is there to protect plantation forests, but they're also available to support
FENS and the rural fire regulating role that FENS has.
A further point is the general rule that 5% of the vegetation
fires cost 95% of the cost of that fire
suppression.
Unlike the urban environment, dedicated fire equipment is
needed.
Dedicated fire equipment is only a small part of the resources used to
suppress vegetation fires.
In the 10 years prior to 2017, the national rural fire authorities in
place and the annual average breakdown of fire suppression
costs for wildfires showed that 42% of the cost is on aircraft,
37% of that cost was on Department of Conservation, Forest Owners or
local government.
Contractor costs such as bulldozers and diggers was 22% of the cost.
Fire apart, hiring was 2%, and the fire service resources
used at vegetation fires in the 10-year period prior to
2017 is 4% of that cost.
What this illustrates is the majority cost of vegetation fires is on aircraft,
heavy machinery, and firefighters working off-road and not urban
fire trucks. Most urban trucks transport firefighters
to vegetation fires and are not used for any other purpose.
History has shown that community fire brigades are very good in that first
response role of suppressing small vegetation fires.
But for the 5% of those wildfires that burn 95% of the area, this
presents a different picture. Prior to 2017, once
rural fire authority resources arrived, the volunteer brigades
were able to return to their community to earn their employment.
This current situation is that FENS are requiring volunteers to spend
a lot more time on vegetation fires. Happy to answer any questions.
Do we have any questions?
You've got one, too?
Yeah. You've covered the rural thing
very well. In your written submission, you also outlined the cost of some of those
new stations in rural areas. But I also know you've
touched on one issue that's come up a little
bit, which has been around false alarms and the impact that has.
I just wondered if you wanted to
touch on either the false alarms or
theOr the implication of that property program
with those sort of rural and low urban area,
like Tenui, like Littleton stations, and
the significance of that.
I think probably of the two, I think the level of false alarms
is concerning for New Zealand. Over
40%
of all calls are false alarms. That impacts not only
on the use of resources when
there's probably another ways of
attending to those that faulty equipment.
The call on volunteers to go to false alarms and taking that-
So what's the answer? Because we're not
expecting firefighters to decide if they trust this one and if they go or
not. Is the answer that it's on property owners
to have a better upkeep of their alarm system?
Or what would you propose as the solution?
Well, my advice would be that the onus on the property owner.
There's a lot of buildings out there that don't have alarm systems and I
think serious consideration needs to be given to the
policy that's in place for the Scotland Fire Service, where
the building owner has to confirm that there is a fire
as a result of that alarm. And once that's confirmed, the fire service
responds to those resources. And that's the same for any
homeowner or building owner that doesn't have alarm
equipment, so they've got to notify the fire service to respond to that
incident.
Thanks, Murray. That does bring us to the end of the time, and that was super
helpful. If there are any statistics there that are
new statistics, because that sounded incredibly helpful in your presentation,
we would love to have that to put into our
work that we're doing.
I'm happy to do that.
That'd be wonderful. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you for the time.
And that brings us to the New Zealand Professional Firefighters
Union, Rotorua local branch.
I think you're online. If you can hear us, if you can put your camera on
and unmute.
I think we nearly got you then.
It's tantalizingly close.
Very close.
Making sure that your camera's working.
No.
Are they there?
Maybe they can unmute and, uh-
If you can unmute and hear us, maybe,
so we can hear you.
I think it's Chris Heath that's going to be joining us.
Can we see them?
They did flicker for a moment, Tom.
We'll give them a short time, and if not, we'll move to our next
submitter
and then we can work the technical issues out.
Looks like we're trying to get there because it keeps flickering.
Okay, have we got Snow Ryan?
Snow Ryan coming on
Zoom. So Snow, perhaps while we sort those technical issues out,
we can go to move to you, if you can put your camera on.
Might be an hour in.
Oh, we've got an in-person.
Is it Taxpayers Union? Yes, Ray, is it?
Correct.
Wonderful, you're here lovely and early, Ray.
Thank you very much. And you know how this goes, I'm
sure. We have 10 minutes with you
and looking forward to your submission.
Yes.
So over to you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members of the committee.
We contend that fleet management issues are merely symptomatic of
a much wider malaise within fire and emergency.
We've prepared three reports over the years since the
merger occurred, and we've participated in
submissions on levy increases,
with a focus on the efficiency of capital and operational
expenditure.
But I would like to talk a bit about your main
concern here, which is fleet management.
Fire and Emergency have claimed that the condition of the assets it
inherited in 2017 from the former rural fire
authorities
were much worse than first realized.
We contend that
simply doesn't hold water.
There was an assessment of rural fire service asset conditions made by
Martin Jenkins, dated 8 May 2015,
and an earlier 2013 National Rural Fire Authority
survey painted the most comprehensive picture of the rural
fleet and did not indicate significant
issues.So, at the time of the
merger in 2017, there would've been a
fairly clear picture of the state of the National Fire Appliance
Fleet, both those deployed in urban and rural
areas.
This means, or it should mean,
prior to the merger, the conditions of the rural and urban fleets would have been
known and appropriate replacement plans should have been made,
costed, and featured in the merger
cost benefit
analysis,
and in the Cabinet papers and supporting documents.
It simply beggars belief that this does not appear to have been done.
But what is extremely astonishing is that FENZ did not have
detailed and comprehensive asset management plans until
2024 and '25.
AMP is the most basic tools for any asset
intensive operation, such as FENZ.
Why was this not an immediate priority?
Having worked in electricity related issues for some years,
I fully understand just how important AMPs are
in every business, and I know it's been a focus
of this government as well.
Fire and Emergency submission focuses heavily on replacing
vehicles beyond their target age.
Isn't a better metric one based on condition
assessment?
That's what a comprehensive asset management plan can provide.
It should be possible to use some assets safely beyond their
target age if they have been well-maintained, and
say, traveled few kilometers.
FENZ is clearly doing this already, so why not formalize it?
And I note that they are developed this as an ongoing work, work they had, and so
maybe they are actually doing that.
I just want to talk briefly about
property.
Why is the cost of constructing rural stations skyrocketed?
Why do some include more space and amenities than strictly necessary?
Why can the Australians construct rural stations far more cheaply?
I realize there are cost differences, but it seems astonishing the
explosion in the cost in recent years.
Now, the big issue for us is governance.
The 2017 merger was predicated on the promise of
savings.
Not only did those savings not occur, but costs also blew out and
continued to rise rapidly until Minister Van Velden
demanded savings.
The excuse that the assets inherited from the rural fire
authorities were worse than expected doesn't wash
when reviews of their conditions were carried out pre-merger.
The failures to deliver the promised savings, would the merger actually
have even gone ahead
had the actual costs that have been incurred subsequent to
merger been known at the time? I very much doubt it.
Failures to control expenditure, failure to efficiently construct
rural fire stations, failure to efficiently manage
assets all suggest a major failure of governance by
the board and Department of Internal Affairs.
They simply failed to hold management to account for their
failure to effectively manage assets and stewardship of
levy payer funds.
The Taxpayers Union is aware that this committee has, in the past, asked some of
these questions of FENZ and did not always get
satisfactory answers.
This is actually quite concerning,
that they can't answer straight questions.
I seem to remember a previous chair
appearing quite exasperated at not getting straight answers to
straight questions.
For all these reasons, this is why this committee needs to expand
its investigation well beyond the fleet issues, as they are simply
a symptom of a wider malaise. There needs to be
a full investigation concerning the costs and benefits of the merger, a
proper post-merger review needs to be started as
soon as possible. But I would like to end on a positive note.
Minister Van Velden deserves thanks for appointing Mr.
Ravin Jesuranam to chair the Board of FENZ.
His long experience with asset management is a skill that is clearly missing.
The Taxpayers' Union has little doubt that he will improve the
efficiency of all that Fire and Emergency does in fairly short
order. Thank you for your time.
Thanks. Thanks, Ray. That's super helpful.
Now I'll open to the committee for any questions.
We've got about
four minutes.
Sure.
Ta.
You referred to the cost of either rural or smaller
stations and the increase in that.
That's just something we've heard and that we've seen in a few
recent submissions.
Do you want to just elaborate on that? And that obviously has an impact.
Your premise is that the lack of savings and the blowing out of
some costs has led to not enough going into fleet.
Can you just explain for us a bit about those smaller stations?
The issue with the cost increases in the property portfolio
is, does that reflect efficient
use of levy payer funds?
It's not so much that if they're paying too much,
then there's
not enough going into the fleet, for example.
In
our last report,
we made the point that... Or actually, in
our last submission, on levy increases,
that there appears to be a cost plus attitude within Fire and
EmergencyThat there's-- And in fact,
in the regulatory impact statement,
the Department of Internal Affairs actually questioned them.
Questioned, "What efficiencies have you tried to
find before you've come to the Crown
to
ask for an increase in the fire service levy?"
And the Auditor General also has raised concerns in the past
about some of their practices.
So there is a
general,
not only at our level, but at a clearly high
level within government as well.
Thank you. Andy.
Going to the, thanks,
the issue you raised about the
cost of fire stations
having skyrocketed. One of the things they told us is that where their money was
being spent in terms of capital expenditure, 40% was going on property, 20% on
fleet,
20 on IT, and 20 on
other equipment.
I think we were sort of raising our eyebrows at all of those, probably particularly
the property one. But any comments on
that? Just seems an extraordinarily high proportion of what they're spending in
terms of the capital.
I think the issue is,
if
their capital spend on property is inefficient,
then as a proportion of total expenditure-
It's going to rise
... it would come down. Sorry, it's gone up.
Yeah.
So that,
again, is maybe one of those
little marker posts that tell you that there's something not
right here.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you.
And question from Lamona.
Yes, just very quickly, thank you for your submission and also your comments.
Just around the asset management plans, because you've got
comments in relation to vehicles and equipment in the final
concluding. Can you just extrapolate a bit more on that
very point?
Sorry, I've missed what you're after.
Yeah. So you've explained here your concluding comments
in your written submission-
Sorry, yes
... which is helpful.
In terms of asset management plans, because we've had a number of
submissions which have pointed to asset management plans in
terms of what has been proposed and what has been delivered.
I just wanted you to add anything to that.
Right. Okay. I would actually love to see what they've done.
And we haven't got that yet. This still is, I understand, a work in
process. I think the big issue, the surprise for me,
was reading their last annual report
for 2024/25 and finding out that they had only
just started to develop these.
Sorry.
And-
Well, they're ahead of Education and Health.
Yeah.
Well, again, it's an issue that Minister Bishop raised some time ago.
And it is really important, and I read some material
very recently which said
New Zealand used to be at the top
of the world in this sort of area, and now we've fallen to
the bottom.
Mm.
Basically, I think
public and private sectors have just taken their eye off the ball here,
and it needs to go back, because it all goes back
to financial efficiency.
Look, thank you, Ray. That's super helpful, and that has brought us
directly to the end of the time. So thank you very much for that.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time.
Yes, thank you. And that brings us back.
Have we got Chris there from the Rotorua Local
NZPFU?
Chris, hey.
It's just a matter of getting your camera, turning your camera on.
Snow instead.
Oh, we might try Snow instead, I hear.
So Snow, if you're there, can you turn your camera on, please?
Here we go.
Oh, yes.
Here we go, Snow.
We need to unmute him.
Just need to unmute there, Snow.
And we're all set to go. Great. We've got five-
Sorry about that.
All good.
Just one note on
why we couldn't connect, is going through the browser, and it didn't give the
correct permissions. So that's probably why we might be having problems
with Chris.
Okay, thank you for that insight.
Anyway, good afternoon.
Right. We've got five minutes with you. Over to you.
Wonderful. Good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to speak
today.
My name is Snow Ryan, and I'm speaking as a former
firefighter
and volunteer controller of a rural fire station.
My perspective comes from direct operational experience within
New Zealand's fire and emergency response environment.
I want to begin by saying that I support this inquiry into fire and
emergency
fleet management and related issues.
Fleet reliability matters enormously.
Appliances that are unavailable, aging,
unsuitable, or improperly maintained
directly affect emergency response capability,
the safety of frontline personnel, and public safety more broadly.
So I believe this inquiry is both necessary and
worthwhile.However, my core
concern is that fleet management cannot be viewed in isolation
from the wider emergency response system.
Operational readiness depends on multiple interconnected parts
functioning together, such as equipment,
staffing, training, communications,
coordination,
leadership, and organizational support.
A functioning appliance alone does not create an effective
emergency response if the wider system surrounding it is
under strain.
Based on both operational experience and ongoing public
reporting, there appear to be broader systemic
pressures affecting multiple parts of Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
These concerns are not confined to one area of the organization.
These are not theoretical concerns.
In a single recent week, the
NZPFU
publicly documented an appliance breaking down en route to a
CBD emergency, a station closing due to
staffing failure,
111 calls diverted to police while leadership were overseas,
and one of the country's busiest medical response stations left without a
crew at shift changeover.
Incidents like these are reported with regularity.
They reflect simultaneous failures across equipment,
staffing,
coordination,
not isolated faults in one part of the system.
They appear to affect career and volunteer personnel,
urban and rural fire stations,
frontline operations,
and organizational coordination structures.
Concerns that continue to emerge publicly include staffing
and retention pressures,
operational fatigue,
training access and consistency,
support for volunteer brigades,
communication and coordination pressures,
and wider confidence in organizational management and
responsiveness.
In many communities, especially regional and rural areas,
volunteers remain a critical part of
frontline resilience.
But this should not be framed as division between career and volunteer
personnel.
Both parts of the system are essential, interdependent, and currently
appear to be facing strain in different ways.
My concern is ultimately about system readiness as a whole.
I believe there is value in examining whether current structures,
funding allocation, support systems, and organizational
leadership settings are fully aligned with
operational realities across the country.
My recommendation to the committee is either to broaden the scope of this
inquiry
or to recommend a complementary system-wide review examining
staffing, retention, training capacity,
volunteer sustainability, operational
readiness,
communication system, and organizational culture across
Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
Because ultimately, fleet capability is only one
component of emergency readiness.
A resilient emergency response
system depends on alignment between equipment, people,
leadership, training, coordination, and organizational
support.
Without examining the wider system, there is a risk that the inquiry identifies
visible symptoms while deeper structural pressures remain
unresolved.
Thank you for your time, and I welcome any questions from the committee.
We would have time for a short one.
Yeah, sure.
Yes, Tim. Yes.
You just talked about that sustainable volunteer participation in your written one
and
often in communities, volunteers are the first and
only responders.
I just wondered if you had any insight into helping maintain that
sustainable balance between volunteers and professional firefighters and
how we
value our volunteers.
It's a very good question. Thank you.
The Ohura VFF is one of the most isolated rural fire
stations in the country.
It's a composite station. I don't know if you're aware of what a composite station
is, but basically, they are front line to all emergencies.
We had
systemic problems, one, with finding locals to
step up to volunteer, but two, for the adequate training
and,
I guess, integration with the urban response center in
Taumarunui.
And I guess it comes down to how the
two, because really rural fire and urban,
it's different management. And I guess the management
structure there, if they could start communicating, that's all going to start
flowing down. So if you get coherence between the two different
structures on how to manage a particular area,
then I think you're going to find that whole
training, co-training, all that's going to actually happen
organically.
Okay.
So really it's engagement between both.
Snow, we've run out of time now, but thank you very much for that.
Really appreciate-
Thank you
... your input.
Thank you.
You're welcome. Thank you.
And look, we've got Chris and team-
Morning
... from Rotorua. Yay. Well done.
Morning.
That must be-
Forward to the, uh-
Thanks to Snow's advice. So that was helpful. Hey, thanks, Chris.
We've got 10 minutes with you. I'm going to hand straight to you
Fantastic.
So, my name's Chris. I'm not an elected official for the Rotorua Local.
However, they've asked me to put together this written and oral submissions.
I've sent through to the committee an extension for my written submission,
and that just goes into a few more details specifically
around the new and old trucks that we have on the station
here.
With me, I have Neil Albert, who's a SME for fleet
and training in the fleet. He's had 28 years of experience
within that area, and hopefully he can help answer any technical
data questions.
So firstly, thanks for taking the plight of firefighters
seriously. We understand the committee is putting in a lot of
work towards this area, and we thank you for that.
I've sent quite a few documents through for all the evidence-based facts and
figures that I've gathered. Most of that has been from FENZ's own
records.
So, a small summary of what I'd like to cover today is the
appliance fault history that we currently have, the fault reporting
system,
the backup coverage we have for the Rotorua station, the FENZ
network model that I've talked about,
the operational impacts, the proposed prototype appliance
they'd like to install at Rotorua Station, and the fit-out,
manufacturing, vehicle weight, and compliance concerns that we
have as a station here.
So you've got the information in front of you.
Are there any questions in relation to any of those
bullet points?
Any questions
from committee members to those bullet points?
No.
You should just carry on and we'll--
might come up with some as we go.
Yeah. I was going to ask- No, no. Go ahead ...
I'm keen to ask you about your Type 3s, if you want to, but if you want to talk
about- Yes ... other stuff first, you go for it.
Yes.
All right. So- No, most of the information is related about the Type 3s.
So if you have a question, well...
Yeah. Can I ask you a really specific one?
You've got 817, which is on your submission, a
2011 Scania.
Yes. I've also heard about-- Are you familiar with Kawerau and
917? Yes.
Can you just- It's a fire engine from Kawerau Station from five years ...
if you understand, can you explain to me the
age difference between the two and the
prioritization for replacement and how that works?
I couldn't speak onto the prioritization of the replacement.
That comes down to FENZ and their cascade system that they have in
place. But the age difference between the appliances
is significant.
Kawerau tends to be a station of no less importance,
but does a fewer number of calls.
But they have a far-reaching
outlying area that they cover. So,
the
station there covers right down to
Lake Waikaremoana, which can be up to in excess of two hours
away. They don't necessarily get the number of calls that Rotorua
Station does. However, that doesn't make them any less important.
Yeah. Okay. And so, the Kawerau
917 likely to be a lot older than 2011, is it?
Yeah. Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay.
I believe-
Well, Chris, you carry on
... it'll be coming up over 25 years old
And we've-
Can I ask one quick question just to comment?
There's a bit of a delay, sorry.
We do have one other question here, but
we've got about four minutes to--
four minutes, seven minutes to go.
So, do you want that question now, or do you want to carry on?
Go for the question. Yep, I'll answer what this committee needs to know.
Right. So this is Andy Foster-
Yeah
... who's going to ask a question.
Hi, guys, and thanks very much. Look, my question really is, you've got the three
vehicles that you've got. Do you use them equally?
Because quite clearly, the newest of those three is the one you've got the
most problems with, or seem to have, because it's a
2016 vehicle, 47 faults.
Yeah. And I notice it's a Man vehicle, and we've had a lot about
Man vehicles. So just, yeah, be really keen-
Yes
... to understand what's going on there with the newer vehicle giving you the most
grief, in a sense.
And the training as well. Yeah.
Yep. So, the new vehicle,
out of our, we did 1,399 calls in
the last 12 months.
453 of those were a single pump response.
Mm.
So, single pump response means it's 811 or the
first pump that rolls out the door and it just goes by itself.
It doesn't need-
Yeah
... any backup, unless it gets there and someone's harmed, as they
seem. So it does a lot more time on the road.
Okay.
And the short, sharp stints that
we drive them in are, is
not necessarily great in the long run for vehicles.
Yeah.
Yeah. So 812 is used a lot less. 817
tends to travel
somewhat further distance than others.
So, each truck has its own niche elements that it
responds. And so it just kind of depends on the use.
And it's not just the driving we need to be aware of.
A pump goes to a fire and it might sit there
for two or three hours working, but it's
not putting Ks on the clock.It's sitting there, the
pump is working, the truck is working to effect water to do
a job, but it's hard to measure that in kilometers when you're parked up
on the side of the road.
Okay, so we shouldn't draw any conclusions from
the fault rate there.
The fault rate,
I couldn't specify which is a better truck because it breaks down
less.
Okay.
The uses between the trucks and the times they're used vary
greatly, and it would be hard to put a comparison in the-
No, fair. Got you
... equation there.
Thanks.
Great. Thank you. So
we've got a few minutes left, so you carry on, and then if we've got any other
questions, we will ask.
And if you have the chance, can you expand on the point about the new appliance and
the training you've been doing? And
in your written submission, you said it felt like it had been rushed through,
and the specification of that vehicle is actually slightly different to your
final one. That would be really helpful.
Yeah, no worries. So straight into that.
FENZ is looking at replacing our youngest
appliance, with a prototype vehicle.
This creates an entirely new set of concerns.
The prototype vehicle currently has 23
known faults or discrepancies between
the other trucks that are being rolled out,
and they don't intend to rectify all of those discrepancies.
So, to clarify, they are willing to
complete the truck and put it on the road as an operational front-line fire
truck without bringing it up to the full specs of the
other new trucks.
And with the
training.
Oh, I guess that means you have to-
You've got bigger bells than we have.
No,
I'm off duty at the moment.
Oh.
So I'm staying put. You're stuck with me.
So the training that was under undertaken,
three out of the four days
the
appliance was here, the new one for us to train on, has-
Two seconds.
Oh.
This is what it's like on a fast exit. This is live.
Yeah, this is live.
Yeah.
So I'll talk on that for about 10 seconds.
At the moment, in Murupara there is a house fire going on,
and they're sending Kawerau and Rotorua to back up
Murupara and Kaingaroa. So for us, that's about a
55-minute drive.
So at the moment, someone's house is burning and it's going to
take us 55 minutes to get there.
Oh.
For us.
Yeah.
Minganui and Kaingaroa may get there earlier,
but as it stands at the moment, it'll take Kawerau and us between 50 and
55 minutes. So just...
Wow.
And that's live.
So the training, that new appliance
broke down in three consecutive days and had to be
replaced for the training to continue.
It broke down enough that the roof monitor, the big projector
on top that squirts a whole lot of water,
wouldn't go down, so couldn't park it away.
If you did drive it or had to move it around, there was alarms going off,
and it just was completely rushed.
So it sounds like what's been called the truck dump.
FENZ has taken these new trucks, pulled them out
before the manufacturer has completed their acceptance testing, and
put them into training to allow that training to be pushed through.
There was no consultation on when the training was to take place.
It was just told, "The new truck is arriving, you're getting
trained on it. Away you go." The new truck has arrived broken
down, and so we've been given a replacement,
to complete that training, which
has all the new bells and whistles that we will not be getting.
So we're training on a truck-
Have you been asked to-
... that is different to what we're going to be getting
... accept one without a deck monitor?
Have you been asked to accept one without a deck monitor?
We haven't been asked that. No. The deck monitor, I believe, is still staying on
there, and they'll need to repair it, but once the repairs have been
done and however they see fit to finish those, they then bring it to
station, and we then, as a local union, take it through an acceptance
testing as an operational firefighter and, bring up
other faults or
concerns then.
So there's the manufacturer's acceptance testing, and then it's rolled into
operations, and we as a fire station will do an acceptance testing.
Hey, Chris.
But we also-
We've got to the end of our time.
Yep.
Unfortunately.
We've got our bells going, too, but we're not off duty, so we
have to be in the house at 2:00. So,
thank you very much.
No worries.
That's super successful, and we may come back for
more questions just because of the way we've got to cut a little bit
short. So we might come back and ask you more.
100%. Feel-
Thanks, heaps.
100%. Feel free to contact me, and I think we have it all in writing. Cheers, team.
Thank you.
Thanks, Chris. Awesome.
Thanks, Chris. Righty-o. Bye-bye.
Thank you.
Bells both sides.